# Machine Learning to Prevent the Use of PEDS

Today $350 million dollars is spent by various sports associations to carry out drug tests and enforce anti-doping protocols. However, with leagues such as the NFL generating over $13 billion per year, simple random drug testing is not enough to prevent the use of performance enhancing drugs. Some of these athletes are able to earn millions more dollars by simply becoming a little bit stronger than the competition, or running a tenth of a second faster than the next guy, and thus, with risk of doping is worth it to them. Therefore, in the past couple of years there has been a massive push to increase the use of data science in order to make random drug tests “less random”. 
	
 The European Journal for Sports and Exercise Science estimated that the, “prevalence of doping in sport can be above 40% depending upon variables such as sport, country, and competition level. However, only 1% to 2% of doping samples collected annually test positive for a banned substance (WADA 2012-2016). Thus, improved strategies that offer more robust, objective, and effective means of detection are needed.”  There have been two emerging methods of performance enhancing drug (PED) detection. The first is called ABP which implements machine learning to measure and track biomarkers related to the use of PEDS. The second method is similar to ABP, but focuses on the tracking of athlete performance as another indirect marker of doping. “Performance measures of many Olympic sports are well studied, with elite athlete’s performance varying less than 2.0% (0.6% to 1.4%) in sprint and endurance sports like running and cycling. Additionally, elite athletes in weightlifting and field events, which require more explosive power in a single effort, exhibit performance varying less than 4.0% (1.4% to 3.3%). Thus, the development of monitoring changes in athlete performance may indeed be another indirect marker of doping as recently demonstrated.” 
By monitoring the slight variation in athletes performance, a mathematical performance model to measure critical power is a viable option to detect PED use. This method has not been fully tested like the ABP method, however, “similar machine-learning algorithms have been shown to improve with the detection and diagnosis of many life-threatening diseases.” 

Preliminary tests for this method were done in the UFC in which data was collected for UFC athletes between 2015-2018. Data was collected on a multitude of variables such as fight duration, knockdowns landed, takedowns accuracy, and significant strikes landed per minute. Then, athletes were identified as having engaged in doping if they had publicly received a sanction for a doping-related offense from USADA. 

Finally, “Machine-learning based classification models used include Support Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest (RF), Multinomial Naïve Bayes (MNB), Logistic Regression, and Gaussian Naïve Bayes (GNB). All classifiers were trained using Python.” Then “A parameter search was done to optimize each model to accurately predict sanctioned athletes.” Results showed a variety of significant differentiation in variables such as takedown accuracy being much higher for sanctioned athletes. Thus, what this data science method has started to show is that by identifying and tracking past athletes that are known to have taken PEDS, we can identify exactly how doping helps certain athletes specifically within their sport. Then, we can simply track data for each athlete within their sport, (which is much more accurate and cost effective than random drug tests) and if a high correlation is shown in variables between current athletes and previously sanctioned athletes, we can administer a drug test. Hopefully as this method continues to develop for all sports, drug detection will increase to the point where athletes realize it is no longer worth it, and sports become much more drug free. 

##Sources:
Adam Beharry Tyler Kelly, “Applying Machine Learning Techniques to Advance Anti-Doping,” European Journal of Sports & Exercise Science (Scholars Research Library, April 17, 2019), https://www.scholarsresearchlibrary.com/articles/applying-machine-learning-techniques-to-advance-antidoping-18437.html.

